---
layout: post
title: GPUKit
description: A C++ framework for OpenGL rendering
<!-- image: assets/images/pic05.jpg -->
repo: https://github.com/saldavonschwartz/GPUKit
---
<!-- Links: -->

- **[About](#1)**
- **[Example Shader Program](#2)**

### <a class="toc_item" name="1"></a>About

GPUKit is a C++ framework for rendering with OpenGL in an object-oriented way. The framework implements the following:

- vertex, geometry and fragment shaders.
- programs.
- buffers (FBO).
- 2D and 3D (Cubemap) textures.
- geometry (VAO + VBO + EBO).

Additionally, GPUKit implements the following convenience classes:

- `Material`: A proxy between programs and per-instance uniform values, allowing multiple materials to share a common program.
- `Pass`: a way to organize the rendering code associated with a program and buffer combination.
- `AssetImporter`: allows importing shaders, 3D geometry and textures and automatically obtaining C++ objects from these.

The project includes an example implementation of a rendering pipeline consisting of:
- deferred shading.
- skybox.
- dynamic point shadows.
- bloom.
- rudimentary rigid-body animation.

{% include media.html
  sources="https://www.youtube.com/embed/e51OzLoGSWc"
  types="2"
  sizes="560-315"
  titles="Video 1."
  descriptions="Demo scene rendered with GPUKit, included in the project."
%}

### <a class="toc_item" name="2"></a>Example Shader Program

Creating a vertex + fragment program involves two steps:

1. Implement the shaders in a single file annotated with GPUKit commands (Code 1).

```glsl
#GPUKIT_VERTEX_STAGE
#version 410 core
#pragma debug(on)

// your uniforms, ins and outs...

void main() {
  // your vertex code...
}
#GPUKIT_END_STAGE

#GPUKIT_FRAGMENT_STAGE
#GPUKIT_ENABLE depth
#version 410 core
#pragma debug(on)

// your uniforms, ins and outs...

void main() {
  // your fragment code...
}
#GPUKIT_END_STAGE
```
<figcaption><strong>Code 1:</strong> A glsl file with both vertex and fragment shader code.</figcaption>

{:start="2"}
2. Import the program via the framework’s `AssetImporter` and link it (Code 2).

```cpp
Program* program = AssetImporter<Program*>::import("example.glsl");
program->link();
```
<figcaption><strong>Code 2:</strong> Importing and linking a GPUKit program.</figcaption>

The framework automatically maps uniform locations and pre-sets texture-unit indices. After linking,
setting attributes of a program in C++ is straightforward (Code 3).

```cpp
program->setUniform<vec3>("uniform name", { 1., 1., 1. });
program->commit();
```
<figcaption><strong>Code 3:</strong> Setting a uniform value.</figcaption>

Materials work in a similar way. Any attributes declared as `Material` structs in glsl files are automatically picked up by GPUKit and the `Material` class proxies their values to the corresponding `Program` object, allowing many materials to reference a single program.

For an example on how the rest of the framework’s classes work take a look at the repo.
