---
layout: post
title: Warp Fun
description: Experiments with homographies
<!-- image: assets/images/pic05.jpg -->
---
<!-- Links: -->
[l1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_7th_Guest
[l3]: https://www.geometrictools.com/Documentation/MovingAlongCurveSpecifiedSpeed.pdf
[l4]: http://www.nouveaucinema.ca/en

- **[About](#1)**
- **[Homographies: A Subclass of the Full Camera Projection](#2)**
- **[Solving for Homographies](#3)**
- **[Application: Rectifying Images](#4)**
- **[Application: Compositing Images into a Scene by Warping](#5)**
- **[Application: Aligning Multiple Images into a Panorama](#6)**

### <a class="toc_item" name="1"></a>About:

Homographies are a type of perspective projection useful in a variety of vision tasks involving planes. In this project I implemented a homography solver and used it on two example cases: stitching multiple images into a rectangular panorama (a mosaic); and projecting arbitrary images on to planar surfaces such as billboards.

### <a class="toc_item" name="2"></a>Homographies: A Subclass of Camera Projection:

A homography is similar to a full camera projection in that it maps 3D points to a 2D image plane, but with 2 constraints:

1. It only maps points which are coplanar in 3D.
  1. The 3D coordinate system is aligned with this plane, such that the plane's z-coordinate is 0.

Under these assumptions, a homography can be represented as a 3x3 matrix, equivalent to a 3x4 projection matrix where the 3rd column has been dropped (since it would have multiplied out anyway by each point's z-component of 0).

**[TODO: image of camera with non coplanar points + matrix vs image of coplanar points with homography]**

### <a class="toc_item" name="3"></a>Solving for Homographies:

Given a set of 4 or more correspondences we want to find a homograhpy $$\mathbf{H}$$ that maps points in a source image to their counterparts in a target image. If we fix the matrix lower right component $$h_{33}$$ at 1 (an arbitrary fixed scale), there are 8 unknowns left to solve for. A minimum of 4 points would do
**[TODO: image of 2 cameras both starting at the same plane in world space plus eqs]**

Solving for a homography means finding a matrix $$\mathbf{H}_{3x3}$$ that maps 2D points from one image plane to another, as if

That is, we want to compute some $$\mathbf{H}_{3x3}$$ such that:



If we fix the matrix lower right component $$h_{33}$$ at 1 (an arbitrary fixed scale), there are 8 unknowns left to solve for.






Revolve is a game that works both in VR mode (Cardboard) and monoscopic mode. A spaceship cruises at constant acceleration thru a looping track and the player has to avoid colliding into rotating traps scattered along the way. The challenge in the game stems from the spaceship progressively speeding up and the traps rotating at different periods. There are two kinds of traps: green traps with quarter blocking segments and red traps with half blocking segments.

In VR mode the player must steer the spaceship by slightly tilting their head (head roll equates to spaceship roll) while in mono mode the player tilts their phone instead.

The project required a path following solution for the spaceship to stay on path and travel at arbitrary velocity. This was done as a two step process:

1. Implementing a Blender plugin in Python, which allowed me to create the track as a series of Bezier curves and export the control points.

2. Implementing a Unity component in C# to evaluate the path at arbitrary velocities. The evaluation approach was done according to this [paper][l3].

{% include media.html
  sources="https://www.youtube.com/embed/HGyhwvXYlCA"
  types="2"
  sizes="560-315"
  titles="Revolve."
  descriptions="Google Cardboard, Unity."
%}
